source/blog/2014-04-17-consul.html.markdown, before:

---
page_title: "Consul"
title: "Consul"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/logo-gradient.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/header.png"
tags: consul
author: Armon Dadgar
---

Today we announce [Consul](http://www.consul.io), a solution for service discovery and
configuration. Consul is completely distributed, highly available, and scales
to thousands of nodes and services across multiple datacenters.

Some concrete problems Consul solves: finding the services applications need
(database, queue, mail server, etc.), configuring services with key/value
information such as enabling maintenance mode for a web application, and
health checking services so that unhealthy services aren’t used. These are
just a handful of important problems Consul addresses.

Consul solves the problem of service discovery and configuration.
Built on top of a foundation of rigorous academic research, Consul keeps your
data safe and works with the largest of infrastructures. Consul embraces
modern practices and is friendly to existing DevOps tooling.

Consul is already deployed in very large infrastructures across multiple
datacenters and has been running in production for several months. We’re
excited to share it publicly.

Read on to learn more.

READMORE

## How it Works

This section will briefly explain how Consul is used and operated. This brief
explanation will show how simple and powerful Consul is. Many technical details
are omitted on purpose since they’re covered in detail in the
[complete documentation](http://www.consul.io/docs/index.html).

Consul has two components: servers and clients. The servers and clients
together form a single Consul cluster. The only difference between servers
and clients are that servers are the only components that store and replicate
data. Members of a Consul cluster automatically discover each other as long as
they are given the address of at least one existing member. The built-in
auto-discovery features of Consul means operators don’t need to hard code server
addresses, making it easy to support a dynamic infrastructure. Reads and
writes can be done to any member of the Consul cluster.

Services are registered using configuration files or via an HTTP API against
any agent (client or server) in the cluster. Registered services and nodes
can be queried using both a DNS interface as well as an HTTP interface. The
DNS interface makes it easy to use Consul without modifying existing services:

<pre class="prettyprint">
$ dig web-frontend.service.consul. ANY
...

;; QUESTION SECTION:
;web-frontend.service.consul. IN ANY

;; ANSWER SECTION:
web-frontend.service.consul. 0 IN A 10.0.3.83
web-frontend.service.consul. 0 IN A 10.0.1.109
</pre>

Consul has integrated health checks, so only healthy nodes and healthy
services are returned via the query interfaces. The HTTP API has additional
endpoints for finding all services as well as viewing the health state of
every service.

Configuration data is set and retrieved using the HTTP API. The API is
purposely very simple so that clients are very easy to write:

<pre class="prettyprint">
$ curl -X PUT -d 'bar' http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/foo
true
$ curl http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/foo
[
 {
 "CreateIndex": 100,
 "ModifyIndex": 200,
 "Key": "foo",
 "Flags": 0,
 "Value": "YmFy"
 }
]
</pre>

## Strong Foundation

Distributed messaging, leader election, security, data storage are not
components anyone should build from scratch. Consul uses highly cited and
peer-reviewed papers based on academic research as a foundation for these
subsystems.

**Messaging** is done via gossip over both UDP and TCP connections. For gossip,
we rely on
[Serf](http://www.serfdom.io), built on top of
[SWIM](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~asdas/research/dsn02-swim.pdf). Serf is
deployed around
the world and powers gossip communication of many thousands of machines.
Gossip is used because it is lightweight and performant.
TCP is used where we need higher reliability for network traffic.

**Leader election** uses
[Raft](https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/wiki/download/attachments/11370504/raft.pdf),
a consensus algorithm out of Stanford.
Having a robust consensus algorithm makes the auto-healing nature of Consul a
pleasure for ops.

**Security** is a serious concern for infrastructure tools. Consul has a
multi-faceted approach. Gossip messaging is secured using a strong symmetric
cipher provided by Serf. You can learn more about it
[here](http://www.consul.io/docs/internals/security.html). RPC
communication done over TCP can be secured using TLS with optional
authentication for both clients and servers.

**Data storage** uses
[LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/), an embedded database that is fully ACID
compliant and provides MVCC. These properties keep the data Consul stores
safe while also being extremely performant.

## HashiCorp Built

At HashiCorp, we build solutions to DevOps problems that are technically
sound and are a joy to use. We don’t take shortcuts with the technologies
we choose, and just as importantly we don’t take shortcuts in the
experience of using and operating our tools. As a result, HashiCorp-made tools
are stable, scalable, and easy to use and operate.

Consul is the fourth such tool we’ve built. Previously, we’ve built
[Vagrant](http://www.vagrantup.com),
[Packer](http://www.packer.io), and
[Serf](http://www.serfdom.io).
Consul works great with our other tools, but doesn’t require the use of
any of them.

[Mitchell Hashimoto](https://github.com/mitchellh) and
[Armon Dadgar](https://github.com/armon) will be present at **GopherCon**
next week. We'll have stickers for all our products (including Consul).
Find us and we'd be happy to talk about any of our tools with you.

## Learn More

To learn more about Consul, please visit the Consul website. The
following pages in particular are good next steps:

* [Intro](http://www.consul.io/intro/index.html) -
  The intro section explains in more detail what Consul is,
  how it works, and includes a brief getting started guide so you can
  quickly play with Consul on your own machine to see just how easy it
  is to use.

* [Internals](http://www.consul.io/docs/internals/index.html) -
  The internals section is an advanced topic but covers
  details about all the internals of Consul for those that are interested.
  It isn’t required reading to use Consul, but is recommended if you want to
  learn about the technologies behind Consul.

* [Comparison to other software](http://www.consul.io/intro/vs/index.html) -
  If you'd like to know how Consul is different from some other options
  out there, take a look at this page where we go into detail on the
  differences.

* [GitHub](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul) -
  The source code for Consul is hosted on GitHub here if you want to
  dive right in. We recommend reading the documentation before diving into a
  code, since an understanding of how Consul works will help greatly in
  understanding the implementation.

Commit message:

Stop using fancy quotes
This really makes people sad when they try to copy-paste.

source/blog/2014-04-17-consul.html.markdown, after:

---
page_title: "Consul"
title: "Consul"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/logo-gradient.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/header.png"
tags: consul
author: Armon Dadgar
---

Today we announce [Consul](http://www.consul.io), a solution for service discovery and
configuration. Consul is completely distributed, highly available, and scales
to thousands of nodes and services across multiple datacenters.

Some concrete problems Consul solves: finding the services applications need
(database, queue, mail server, etc.), configuring services with key/value
information such as enabling maintenance mode for a web application, and
health checking services so that unhealthy services aren't used. These are
just a handful of important problems Consul addresses.

Consul solves the problem of service discovery and configuration.
Built on top of a foundation of rigorous academic research, Consul keeps your
data safe and works with the largest of infrastructures. Consul embraces
modern practices and is friendly to existing DevOps tooling.

Consul is already deployed in very large infrastructures across multiple
datacenters and has been running in production for several months. We're
excited to share it publicly.

Read on to learn more.

READMORE

## How it Works

This section will briefly explain how Consul is used and operated. This brief
explanation will show how simple and powerful Consul is. Many technical details
are omitted on purpose since they're covered in detail in the
[complete documentation](http://www.consul.io/docs/index.html).

Consul has two components: servers and clients. The servers and clients
together form a single Consul cluster. The only difference between servers
and clients are that servers are the only components that store and replicate
data. Members of a Consul cluster automatically discover each other as long as
they are given the address of at least one existing member. The built-in
auto-discovery features of Consul means operators don't need to hard code server
addresses, making it easy to support a dynamic infrastructure. Reads and
writes can be done to any member of the Consul cluster.

Services are registered using configuration files or via an HTTP API against
any agent (client or server) in the cluster. Registered services and nodes
can be queried using both a DNS interface as well as an HTTP interface. The
DNS interface makes it easy to use Consul without modifying existing services:

<pre class="prettyprint">
$ dig web-frontend.service.consul. ANY
...

;; QUESTION SECTION:
;web-frontend.service.consul. IN ANY

;; ANSWER SECTION:
web-frontend.service.consul. 0 IN A 10.0.3.83
web-frontend.service.consul. 0 IN A 10.0.1.109
</pre>

Consul has integrated health checks, so only healthy nodes and healthy
services are returned via the query interfaces. The HTTP API has additional
endpoints for finding all services as well as viewing the health state of
every service.

Configuration data is set and retrieved using the HTTP API. The API is
purposely very simple so that clients are very easy to write:

<pre class="prettyprint">
$ curl -X PUT -d 'bar' http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/foo
true
$ curl http://localhost:8500/v1/kv/foo
[
 {
 "CreateIndex": 100,
 "ModifyIndex": 200,
 "Key": "foo",
 "Flags": 0,
 "Value": "YmFy"
 }
]
</pre>

## Strong Foundation

Distributed messaging, leader election, security, data storage are not
components anyone should build from scratch. Consul uses highly cited and
peer-reviewed papers based on academic research as a foundation for these
subsystems.

**Messaging** is done via gossip over both UDP and TCP connections. For gossip,
we rely on
[Serf](http://www.serfdom.io), built on top of
[SWIM](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~asdas/research/dsn02-swim.pdf). Serf is
deployed around
the world and powers gossip communication of many thousands of machines.
Gossip is used because it is lightweight and performant.
TCP is used where we need higher reliability for network traffic.

**Leader election** uses
[Raft](https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/wiki/download/attachments/11370504/raft.pdf),
a consensus algorithm out of Stanford.
Having a robust consensus algorithm makes the auto-healing nature of Consul a
pleasure for ops.

**Security** is a serious concern for infrastructure tools. Consul has a
multi-faceted approach. Gossip messaging is secured using a strong symmetric
cipher provided by Serf. You can learn more about it
[here](http://www.consul.io/docs/internals/security.html). RPC
communication done over TCP can be secured using TLS with optional
authentication for both clients and servers.

**Data storage** uses
[LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/), an embedded database that is fully ACID
compliant and provides MVCC. These properties keep the data Consul stores
safe while also being extremely performant.

## HashiCorp Built

At HashiCorp, we build solutions to DevOps problems that are technically
sound and are a joy to use. We don't take shortcuts with the technologies
we choose, and just as importantly we don't take shortcuts in the
experience of using and operating our tools. As a result, HashiCorp-made tools
are stable, scalable, and easy to use and operate.

Consul is the fourth such tool we've built. Previously, we've built
[Vagrant](http://www.vagrantup.com),
[Packer](http://www.packer.io), and
[Serf](http://www.serfdom.io).
Consul works great with our other tools, but doesn't require the use of
any of them.

[Mitchell Hashimoto](https://github.com/mitchellh) and
[Armon Dadgar](https://github.com/armon) will be present at **GopherCon**
next week. We'll have stickers for all our products (including Consul).
Find us and we'd be happy to talk about any of our tools with you.

## Learn More

To learn more about Consul, please visit the Consul website. The
following pages in particular are good next steps:

* [Intro](http://www.consul.io/intro/index.html) -
  The intro section explains in more detail what Consul is,
  how it works, and includes a brief getting started guide so you can
  quickly play with Consul on your own machine to see just how easy it
  is to use.

* [Internals](http://www.consul.io/docs/internals/index.html) -
  The internals section is an advanced topic but covers
  details about all the internals of Consul for those that are interested.
  It isn't required reading to use Consul, but is recommended if you want to
  learn about the technologies behind Consul.

* [Comparison to other software](http://www.consul.io/intro/vs/index.html) -
  If you'd like to know how Consul is different from some other options
  out there, take a look at this page where we go into detail on the
  differences.

* [GitHub](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul) -
  The source code for Consul is hosted on GitHub here if you want to
  dive right in. We recommend reading the documentation before diving into a
  code, since an understanding of how Consul works will help greatly in
  understanding the implementation.
