---
page_title: "Vault 0.3"
title: "Vault 0.3"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/vault/list.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/vault/header.png"
tags: vault
author: Jeff Mitchell
---

We are proud to announce the release of [Vault 0.3](https://vaultproject.io).
Vault is a tool for managing secrets. From storing credentials and API keys to
encrypting sensitive data, Vault is meant to be a solution for all secret
management needs.

Vault 0.3 brings many new features including an `ssh` backend, a `cubbyhole`
backend, new features and improvements to the `transit` backend, settable
global and per-mount default/max TTLs, PGP encryption for unseal keys, large
performance improvements for the `generic` backend, Duo Multi-Factor
Authentication support, and much more. We cannot possibly list all of the
improvements here, so please see the full
[Vault 0.3 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/blob/v0.3.0/CHANGELOG.md)
for more details.

In addition, the entire 0.2 codebase underwent an audit by noted security
experts iSEC Partners. Although we cannot share the results, their feedback
was valuable, and we intend to continue with regular security audits to
ensure that Vault can be trusted with the secrets of even the most cautious of
organizations.

As always, a big thanks to our community for their ideas, bug reports,
and pull requests.

You can [download Vault 0.3](https://vaultproject.io/downloads.html) from the
project website.

Read on to learn more about the major new features in Vault 0.3.

READMORE

## SSH Backend

The new [Vault `ssh` secret backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/ssh/index.html)
allows Vault to arbitrate SSH to machines through the use of One-Time Passwords
(OTPs) or dynamically-generated SSH keys.

In a typical organization, delegation of SSH access has been performed in a
number of ways. The least secure has been manual sharing of access tokens
(passwords or keys) to a specific user on the target host; once this is done,
it can be difficult or impossible to know which actual person performed an
action with that user account. A step up is creating separate user accounts on
every machine for each user, which allows better tracking but is a logistical
nightmare. A third approach is a bastion host that proxies SSH access,
allowing central configuration but at a severe performance penalty.

Vault's `ssh` backend solves this problem by marrying the flexible policy/ACL
capabilities of Vault with flexible role definitions, allowing authenticated
Vault users to request credentials from Vault as a central configuration point
but then connect directly to end-hosts, without a performance penalty. Roles
match usernames and other parameters to CIDR inclusion and exclusion lists.

The following example uses the recommended One-Time Password type of the
backend. Because every access has a different One-Time Password, Vault's
audit logs can precisely marry which token was used to log in to a system,
even when those logins are accessing the same user.

    $ vault write ssh/roles/otp_key_role key_type=otp default_user=username cidr_list=x.x.x.x/y,m.m.m.m/n
    Success! Data written to: ssh/roles/otp_key_role

    $ vault write ssh/creds/otp_key_role ip=x.x.x.x
    Key             Value
    lease_id        ssh/creds/otp_key_role/73bbf513-9606-4bec-816c-5a2f009765a5
    lease_duration  600
    lease_renewable false
    port            22
    username        username
    ip              x.x.x.x
    key             2f7e25a2-24c9-4b7b-0d35-27d5e5203a5c
    key_type        otp

The OTP can be used directly as the SSH password:

    $ ssh username@localhost
    Password: <Enter OTP>
    username@ip:~$

Or, you can use the new `vault ssh` command to automate it:

    $ vault ssh -role otp_key_role username@x.x.x.x
    username@ip:~$

The `ssh` backend is another example of how Vault can be used as a security
foundation, beyond just storing secret data. Using the `ssh` backend makes
it simpler for organizations to migrate to a zero trust datacenter.

## Cubbyhole Backend

The new
[Vault `cubbyhole` secret backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/cubbyhole/index.html)
is a variation on the
[`generic` secret backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/generic/index.html)
with an important distinction: the entire space is tied to a particular token,
giving each token a "cubbyhole" for stashing data. When the token expires or
is revoked, its cubbyhole is removed and the data inside is no longer
accessible.

This enables a number of useful workflows, including some previously difficult
authentication scenarios. As an example, suppose you need to give a
container a Vault token that it will use to fetch the rest of its secrets and
credentials. One common way is to inject the token into the container's
environment, with the drawback that this environment is readable by any process
with visibility into the container runtime, and may well appear in logs from
the container management system, host, or the container itself.

However, in many situations such logs may not be accessible immediately. As a
result, using the `cubbyhole` backend, we can take advantage of several of
Vault's security primitives (limited use credentials, credential expiration) to
construct the following authentication workflow:

1. A process responsible for creating Vault authentication tokens creates two tokens: a permanent (`perm`) token and a temporary (`temp`) token. The `perm` token contains the final set of policies desired for the application in the container. The `temp` token has a lease duration of 15 seconds and a maximum use count of 2.
2. The `temp` token is used to write the `perm` token into the cubbyhole storage specific to `temp`. This requires a single write operation, reducing the remaining uses of `temp` to one.
3. The invoked process gives the `temp` token to the container management engine, which starts the container and injects the `temp` token value into the container environment.
4. The application inside the container reads the `temp` token from the container environment and uses it to fetch the `perm` token from the cubbyhole. This read operation exhausts the `temp` token's use limit, the `temp` token is revoked, and its cubbyhole is destroyed.
5. If the application is unable to use the `temp` token, it alerts; because accesses to the cubbyhole are logged in Vault's audit logs, an operator can then use the logs to discover whether the application took too long to start (and adjust the timeout of the temp token accordingly) or whether another process had used the token.

No solution to the chicken-and-egg problem of initial credential management is
perfect. However, due to the short invalidity period and limited uses of the
shared initial credential, we think that this will be an acceptable solution
for many teams trying to manage security policy.

## Flexible TTLs

Vault now supports tunable system and per-mount TTLs for leases, for both
default and maximum durations.

The system settings are configured in
[Vault's configuration file](https://vaultproject.io/docs/config/index.html).
The per-mount configuration is handled by a new command: `mount-tune`, along
with additional output to the `mounts` command:

    $ vault mounts
    Path        Type       Default TTL  Max TTL  Description
    cubbyhole/  cubbyhole  n/a          n/a      per-token private secret storage
    secret/     generic    system       system   generic secret storage
    sys/        system     n/a          n/a      system endpoints used for control, policy and debugging

    $ vault mount-tune -default-lease-ttl=4h -max-lease-ttl=24h secret
    Successfully tuned mount 'secret'!

    $ vault mounts
    Path        Type       Default TTL  Max TTL  Description
    cubbyhole/  cubbyhole  n/a          n/a      per-token private secret storage
    secret/     generic    14400        86400    generic secret storage
    sys/        system     n/a          n/a      system endpoints used for control, policy and debugging

An important part of this feature is that while the per-mount default TTL must
be less than the per-mount maximum TTL (or, if there is no per-mount maximum
TTL, the system maximum TTL), the per-mount maximum TTL *overrides* the system
value (as such, `root` tokens or tokens with appropriate `sudo` access) are
required). Combined with the fact that most backends can be mounted at multiple
paths, this allows for a very high degree of administrative flexibility.

See the
[mounts API documentation](https://vaultproject.io/docs/http/sys-mounts.html)
for full details.

Note: it is currently up to each backend as to whether it adheres to the set
default. Some backends may ignore this, to (for instance) allow per-role
defaults instead. However, the configured maximums are enforced by Vault's
core, so will *always* be honored.

## PGP Encryption for Unseal Keys

A `pgp_keys` parameter can now be passed when initializing Vault or rotating its
master key, formatted as a string array with base64-encoded PGP keys. The length
must match the `secret_shares` parameter. If provided, each output unseal key
will be encrypted with the given public keys; ordering is preserved.

See the
[init API documentation](https://vaultproject.io/docs/http/sys-init.html)
for more details.

## Performance Improvements for Generic

The [`generic` backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/generic/index.html)
supports the idea of a TTL, but does not actually destroy data when the TTL runs out.
The idea is for writers of data to tell consumers of the data how often they should
check for new values. However, each read on a value set with a TTL would generate
a lease, which became an incredibly costly operation when the number of reads scaled up.

In 0.3, `generic` no longer generates leases when values are read. A TTL will still be
returned; either the system/mount default, or the TTL set on a particular key, but
this operation does not register a lease in Vault's core. Benchmarks have shown about
a 10x increase in the number of reads per time period that Vault can support as a
result.

## Duo Multi-Factor Authentication Support

For supporting auth backends (currently
[`ldap`](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/ldap.html) and
[`userpass`](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/userpass.html)), Vault's
[`mfa` auth support](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/mfa.html) can now use
[Duo](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/mfa.html). See the
[`mfa` documentation](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/mfa.html) for details.

## Upgrade Details

Vault 0.3 introduces some changes to how it stores data designed to further
enhance Vault's capability to detect tampering within its physical store.

As a result, all data written by Vault 0.3 cannot be read by prior versions of
Vault. If you think you may want to roll back, ensure you have a stored copy
of your storage backend data.

There are a few other deprecations; note that deprecations and breaking changes
are announced in advance on the
[Vault mailing list](https://groups.google.com/group/vault-tool):

* As noted in the [Vault 0.3 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/blob/v0.3.0/CHANGELOG.md), cookie
authentication is *no longer supported*. You *must* use the `X-Vault-Token`
header for authentication.

* In order to address confusion over the term "lease" being used to
describe both a collection of metadata, including a duration, and the duration
itself, we are migrating to the term Time-To-Live ("ttl") to describe the
duration. At this time, there are no plans to replace the areas in the API
using "lease_duration" -- such as in returned JSON responses -- as this is a
more verbose but still accurate term; however, we will be deprecating the use
of the term "lease" in backends going forward. For 0.3, "lease" is still
accepted for the
[`generic`](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/generic/index.html),
[`token`](https://vaultproject.io/docs/auth/token.html), and
[`pki`](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/generic/index.html) backends,
but you should migrate to using "ttl" for these; in 0.4 only "ttl" will be
supported. Other backends will migrate in future releases.

## Roadmap

While the roadmap for 0.4 is still being determined, there are a few things
that we know will be included:

* Increased capabilities for the `pki` backend, including in-Vault self-signed
and intermediate CA certificate generation and the ability to issue certificates
requested in CSRs. You will be able to use Vault to manage your entire X.509 PKI
workflow from start to finish.
* A rewrite of the LDAP authentication backend, which will improve its
flexibility and compatibility with more LDAP server configurations.
* The ability to push CRL lists into the `tls` authentication backend for
revocation checking, similar to Chrome's CRLSets.

Of course, other improvements and bug fixes will be included as well!

As always, we recommend upgrading and testing this release in an isolated
environment. If you experience any issues, please report them on the
[Vault GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/issues) or post to the
[Vault mailing list](https://groups.google.com/group/vault-tool).
