---
page_title: "Vault 0.2"
title: "Vault 0.2"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/vault/list.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/vault/header.png"
tags: vault
author: Armon Dadgar
---

We are proud to announce the release of [Vault 0.2](https://vaultproject.io).
Vault is a tool for managing secrets. From storing credentials and API keys to
encrypting sensitive data, Vault is meant to be a solution for all secret
management needs.

The initial public release of Vault was almost two months ago and we have
been busy extending the core capabilities, adding new secret and storage
backends, improving user experience, and fixing bugs.

Vault 0.2 brings many new features including key rotation, rekeying,
a PKI secret backend for dynamic certificate generation, a Cassandra
secret backend, many new storage backends, and derived unique per-transaction
keys for the transit backend. There are so many amazing changes that we 
cannot possibly list them here, so please see the full
[Vault 0.2 CHANGELOG](https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/blob/v0.2.0/CHANGELOG.md)
for more details.

You can [download Vault 0.2](https://vaultproject.io/downloads.html) from the
project website.

Read on to learn more about the major new features in Vault 0.2.

READMORE

## Key Rotation and Rekeying

When a Vault server is first started, the `vault init` command is used to initialize
the system. This creates the encryption key which is used to protect data at rest,
the master key which is used to protect the encryption key, and key shares which
are used to split the master key.

In Vault 0.1, all of those were static and could not be changed after they
were created. Vault 0.2 allows these to all be updated. This is done by
adding two new commands: `rotate` and `rekey`.

The first command `rotate` is used to change the encryption key that is used
to protect data at rest. When invoked (either through the CLI or directly
with the API), a new random key is generated and installed in the keyring. All
new data that is persisted uses the new key, while keys encrypted under older
keys can still be decrypted. As of Vault 0.2, the old keys are not automatically
re-encrypted but this is a planned future enhancement.

    $ vault key-status
    Key Term: 1
    Installation Time: 2015-07-14 20:46:31 +1000 AEST

    $ vault rotate
    Key Term: 2
    Installation Time: 2015-07-14 20:46:36 +1000 AEST

    $ vault key-status
    Key Term: 2
    Installation Time: 2015-07-14 20:46:36 +1000 AEST

The second command `rekey` is used to change the master key or the parameters
of the key shares. The `init` command allows the number of shares and the
threshold required to be set. Using the `rekey` command allows those parameters
to be changed. This also provides a way to change the key shares if a previous
key holder leaves an organization.

The `rekey` process is a bit more complex, as it must involve the existing
key holders. The process is started by specifying the new number of shares
and threshold (which could be the same). Once the existing threshold is met,
the master key will be regenerated and the new key shares provided.

    $ vault rekey -init
    Started: true
    Key Shares: 5
    Key Threshold: 3
    Rekey Progress: 0
    Required Keys: 1

    $ vault rekey
    Rekey already in progress
    Key Shares: 5
    Key Threshold: 3

    Key (will be hidden):
    Key 1: 9de4b5732ad06ca5c982ebc189d100763e0dfa88afc44ebfe2d707237cde17c001
    Key 2: 54cc5de89f2731e46eaac690b3b017fa6173acab9375285bfb360c6b6c6bc15902
    Key 3: 2f216b05195ae4b454f98c23ed0aa9a966cb4e187f54a71a1253ab975b0f1d6403
    Key 4: 9288da985a7956255b7e8ee75220e27fcaa0dc99b4bb953314822aeb3a674dfb04
    Key 5: e965ec75dc048375612dc4540c9a5c2ccd183e2a589a1a72fde78d170d0391c605

    Vault rekeyed with 5 keys and a key threshold of 3. Please
    securely distribute the above keys. When the Vault is re-sealed,
    restarted, or stopped, you must provide at least 3 of these keys
    to unseal it again.

    Vault does not store the master key. Without at least 3 keys,
    your Vault will remain permanently sealed.

Both the `rekey` and `rotate` commands can be done online without any
disruption to service. They also work in HA environments with multiple
Vault instances.

## PKI Secret Backend

The new [Vault `pki` secret backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/pki/index.html)
can be used to turn Vault into an internal certificate authority. The backend makes use
of the dynamic secret features of Vault to generate x509 certificates on demand for
clients.

Running an internal PKI setup has typically been a challenging process due to the
automation required to generate certificates, distribute them, and properly manage
updating and revocation. This has caused many organizations to issue very long-lived
certificates and distribute them with configuration management systems. This creates
a large exposure surface and in the case of a compromise the long-lived certificates
tend to be usable due to limited use of CRL and OCSP.

The `pki` backend to Vault makes this process much simpler and more secure.
Operators can simply provide Vault with a root or intermediary certificate and
define various roles which require certificates. Clients of Vault can requests
certificates as needed, and have them generated on demand. Instead of using very
long-lived certificates, Vault can generate certificates that last only minutes,
and instead are frequently updated. This limits the exposure in case of a compromise,
and combined with automatic CRL generation makes it much safer to issue certificates.

    $ vault write pki/issue/common common_name=www.hashicorp.com
    Key             Value
    lease_id        pki/issue/common/819393b5-e1a1-9efd-b72f-4dc3a1972e31
    lease_duration  259200
    lease_renewable false
    certificate     -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
    MIIECDCCAvKgAwIBAgIUXmLrLkTdBIOOIYg2/BXO7docKfUwCwYJKoZIhvcNAQEL
    ...
    az3gfwlOqVTdgi/ZVAtIzhSEJ0OY136bq4NOaw==
    -----END CERTIFICATE-----
    issuing_ca      -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
    MIIDUTCCAjmgAwIBAgIJAKM+z4MSfw2mMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAMBsxGTAXBgNV
    ...
    -----END CERTIFICATE-----
    private_key     -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    MIIEowIBAAKCAQEA0cczc7Y2yIu7aD/IaDi23Io+tvvDS9XaXXDUFW1kqd58P83r
    ...
    3xhCNnZ3CMQaM2I48sloVK/XoikMLb5MZwOUQn/V+TrhWP4Lu7qD
    -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
    serial          5e:62:eb:2e:44:dd:04:83:8e:21:88:36:fc:15:ce:ed:da:1c:29:f5

The `pki` backend is another example of how Vault can be used as a security
foundation, to go beyond just storing secret data. Using the `pki` backend makes
it simpler for organizations to embrace mutual TLS and begin to migrate to a
zero trust datacenter.

A major thanks to [Jeff Mitchell](https://github.com/jefferai) for contributing
this backend and to Akamai for sponsoring his efforts.

## Per-Transaction Derived Keys

The [`transit` secret backend](https://vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/transit/index.html)
has been available since the initial release of Vault. The backend is used to
help encrypt and decrypt data in transit through Vault. We [previously blogged](/blog/how-atlas-uses-vault-for-managing-secrets.html)
about how HashiCorp uses Vault's transit backend to protect the sensitive data
stored by Atlas.

At the core, the `transit` backend manages a set of named keys. The keys are held
within Vault, and data can be sent in plaintext to be encrypted within Vault or
ciphertext sent to be decrypted. This allows clients to manipulate data without
ever having access to the encryption keys. This makes it easier to manage
PII information in web servers, while still using RDBMS systems for scalable storage.

With Vault 0.2, the `transit` backend now supports setting the `derived` property
of a named key. When a key is created with this property, any encrypt or decrypt
operation must also provide a `context` along with the plaintext or ciphertext.

This `context` is used with the raw encryption key to generate a _derived_ key.
This transaction key is derived using the secured high entropy key, and is used
to encrypt or decrypt the provided data. This allows each transaction using the
same named key to use a different encryption key. A compromise of any transaction
does not reveal any data about any other transactions with a different context
or the raw encryption key.

    $ vault write transit/keys/foo derived=true
    Success! Data written to: transit/keys/foo

    $ CTX=`echo -n foo | base64`
    $ vault write transit/encrypt/foo context=$CTX plaintext=`echo -n bar | base64`
    Key       	Value
    ciphertext	vault:v0:DykggPIDCMz+vqrWsqa309HtQs2c3Y2BxedNCTlQQQ==

    $ vault write transit/decrypt/foo context=$CTX ciphertext="vault:v0:DykggPIDCMz+vqrWsqa309HtQs2c3Y2BxedNCTlQQQ=="
    Key      	Value
    plaintext	YmFy

    $ echo YmFy | base64 -D
    bar

The actual implementation of derived keys is based on the
[NIST SP 800-108](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-108/sp800-108.pdf)
recommendations.

## ACL Policy Improvements

The policy language for Vault was inspired by the Consul ACL policy language.
In Vault 0.1, the policies looked like:

    path "sys/" {
        policy = "read"
    }

    path "secret/" {
        policy = "write"
    }

In this original version, all `path` stanza's would glob and greedily
match on the request path by default. This made it impossible to specify
an exact-match policy. With Vault 0.2, this is now made explicit with the
`*` glob wildcard:

    path "sys/*" {
        policy = "read"
    }

    path "secret/*" {
        policy = "write"
    }

    # Only permit the 'foo' key exactly
    path "transit/encrypt/foo" {
        policy = "write"
    }

Second, Vault is always default deny system, meaning unless permission
is explicitly given it will be denied by the ACLs. However, with Vault 0.1
the policy language gave the `deny` policy the lowest precedence, this made
it hard to black list specific paths. Vault 0.2 now gives it the highest
precedence. This enables the following;

    path "secret/*" {
        policy = "read"
    }

    path "secret/super-secret" {
        policy = "deny"
    }

**With Vault 0.2, any operation to the `secret/super-secret` path would
now be denied where it was previously allowed by the first rule.** Please note
that this may be a breaking change for existing policy files.

## Upgrade Details

Vault 0.2 introduces some major internal changes to support the `rekey`
and `rotate` commands. The policy language changes similarly change the
way policies are specified and enforced.

All of these upgrades however are done online when the new version of
Vault is unsealed. The existing representation of the encryption key
will be upgraded to the keyring in place. Any existing policies will
be updated to ensure the implicit glob behavior continues to work.

All policy files should be upgraded, since any new policies written
are assumed to conform to the Vault 0.2 specification. There is no way
to use the old specification as an attempt to deprecate it while the
project is still young.

## Roadmap

Vault 0.2 is a major release that extends the functionality and fixes many
major usability and stability issues. As a result, we expect that there will be some new
issues which will be address in point released following. We are expecting to
start a full external code audit of Vault shortly.

Following that, Vault 0.2 will be focused on adding support for `vault ssh`, which
will use one-time-keys and one-time-passwords for solving the shared SSH key problem,
adding support for new secret, auth, and credential backends, improving usability
and fixing bugs.

As always, we recommend upgrading and testing this release in an isolated environment.
If you experience any issues, please report them on the
[Vault GitHub issue tracker](https://github.com/hashicorp/vault/issues) or post to the
[Vault mailing list](https://groups.google.com/group/vault-tool).

