---
page_title: "Packer 0.8"
title: "Packer 0.8"
list_image_url: /images/blog/packer/logo.png
post_image_url: /images/blog/packer/logo.png
author: Mitchell Hashimoto
tags: packer
---

We've released [Packer 0.8](https://packer.io). Packer is a tool for
building virtual machine images, containers, and other deployable artifacts.

Packer 0.7 has been out for almost a year (with minor releases since then),
and we decided it was time for a major release. Packer 0.8 is an immensely
large release, with over a dozen new features. A big thanks to the community
who had over 100 pull requests, as well as to HashiCorp employees
[Chris Bednarski](https://github.com/cbednarski) and [Clint Shryock](https://github.com/catsby)
who both dedicated time to this release.

Packer 0.8 is available immediately for download and is already running
within [Atlas](https://atlas.hashicorp.com/learn/packer).

Feature highlights for Packer 0.8:

  * [WinRM and Windows Provisioners](/blog/packer-0-8.html#winrm-and-windows-provisioners)
  * [Windows AWS Images](/blog/packer-0.8.html#windows-aws)
  * [SSH Agent Forwarding, Bastion Hosts, and more](/blog/packer-0-8.html#ssh)
  * [OpenStack Identity v3 and more](/blog/packer-0-8.html#openstack)
  * [Local Shell Script Provisioning](/blog/packer-0-8.html#shell-local)
  * [Dozens of smaller improvements](/blog/packer-0-8.html#improvements)

READMORE

<a id="winrm"></a>

## WinRM and Windows Provisioners

Packer now supports WinRM connections as an alternative to SSH. This means
that Packer can now natively configure Windows without having to install
an SSH server (something that isn't normal for current Windows machines).

WinRM is easy to configure:

<pre class="prettyprint">
{
    "builders": [{
        ...

        "communicator": "winrm",
        "winrm_username": "Administrator"
    }]
}
</pre>

You can also configure the WinRM port, WinRM password, etc. But most
builders will automatically export this information for you.

Packer 0.8 also ships with three new Windows-specific provisioners:
[PowerShell](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/powershell.html),
[windows-shell (cmd)](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/windows-shell.html),
and [windows-restart](https://packer.io/docs/provisioners/windows-restart.html).
These provisioners each require WinRM to be used as the connection.

The PowerShell provisioner lets you execute PowerShell scripts, the
Windows Shell provisioner executes batch scripts, and the Windows restart
provisioner initiates a restart and waits for the machine to complete the
restart.

<a id="windows-aws"></a>

## Windows AWS Images

The Amazon builders for Packer now support creating Windows images.
Prior versions of Packer only supported Linux.

Building a Windows AWS image is seamless and requires no new configuration.
You only have to specify a Windows AMI as a source image, and Packer will do
the rest. You usually want to pair this with the
[WinRM communicator](/blog/packer-0-8.html#winrm).

An example valid template to build a Windows AMI is shown below:

<pre class="prettyprint">
{
    "builders": [{
        "type": "amazon-ebs",
        "region": "us-east-1",
        "source_ami": "ami-c01102a8",
        "instance_type": "m3.medium",
        "ami_name": "windows-ami {{timestamp}}",
        "user_data_file": "{{template_dir}}/setup_winrm.txt",

        "communicator": "winrm",
        "winrm_username": "Administrator"
    }],

    "provisioners": [
        {
            "type": "powershell",
            "inline": [
                "dir c:\\"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
</pre>

<a id="ssh"></a>

## SSH Agent Forwarding, Bastion Hosts, and more

SSH within Packer has received many features and improvements. Packer will
forward your SSH agent by default, can connect through bastion hosts, and
SSH can also be completely disabled now.

SSH agent forwarding requires no new configuration. If Packer detects an
SSH agent running on the machine running Packer, it will automatically
forward it. You can disable SSH agent forwarding, as well.

Bastion hosts allow Packer to create images within private networks
through a bastion. This has been heavily requested for a long time and
configuring it is easy:

<pre class="prettyprint">
{
    "builders": [{
        ...,

        "ssh_bastion_host": "1.2.3.4",
        "ssh_bastion_username": "foo",
        "ssh_bastion_private_key_file": "{{template_dir}}/bastion.key"
    }],

    "provisioners": [
        {
            "type": "powershell",
            "inline": [
                "dir c:\\"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
</pre>

And finally, you can now completely disable SSH if you don't want to use it.
You can do this by specifying `"communicator": "none"`. Note that without
a communicator, provisioners will not work.

<a id="openstack"></a>

## OpenStack Identity v3 and more

The OpenStack builder has been reworked from the ground up to be much more
user friendly and to support new features. The most notable new feature
is support for v3 of the identity API.

In addition to identity v3, various improvements have been made:

  * UUID as well as human friendly names can be specified for flavors
    and images.

  * Availability zones are supported.

  * Packer will stop the instance prior to snapshotting to avoid disk
    corruption if the OpenStack cluster supports the extension.

  * User data is supported.

And much more...

<a id="shell-local"></a>

## Local Shell Provisioning

Packer now has a `shell-local` provisioner for executing local shell
scripts as part of the provisioning process. Usage is straightforward:

<pre class="prettyprint">
{
    "provisioners": [{
         "type": "shell-local",
         "command": "echo hello!"
    }]
}
</pre>

This is also supported in [Atlas](https://atlas.hashicorp.com/learn/packer)!
Atlas runs Packer builds within a virtual machine, so you can execute
custom scripts.

<a id="improvements"></a>

## Dozens of smaller improvements

In addition to the major features above, Packer 0.8 includes some
noteworthy improvements:

  * The file provisioner supports downloading files from the remote machine.

  * The compress post-processor supports multiple compression algorithms
    and will also compress files in parallel if possible.

  * Downloads of ISOs and other large files now support resuming. If you
    ctrl-C or Packer crashes, the download will resume on the next run.

  * Every builder now supports all SSH options, WinRM, etc. Before, each
    builder had different SSH options.

  * The Docker builder supports containers with SSH.

  * New configuration functions are available: `build_name`, `build_type`,
    and `template_dir`.

## Conclusion

Packer 0.8 is a huge release with many features. The highlight of the
release is the improvement in Windows support across the board. Packer can
now build Windows images for any builder that supports it without any
external plugins. Features such as resumable file downloads also help
Windows, which generally has very large ISOs.

But in addition to Windows, Packer 0.8 improved almost every builder across
the board. OpenStack was rewritten, all outstanding Amazon builder bugs are
fixed, the DigitalOcean builder is much more stable, etc.

[Download Packer now](https://packer.io/downloads.html) or
[use it in Atlas](https://atlas.hashicorp.com/learn/packer).
