---
page_title: "Terraform 0.5"
title: "Terraform 0.5"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/terraform/small.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/terraform/big.png"
tags: terraform
author: Mitchell Hashimoto
---

We've released [Terraform 0.5](http://www.terraform.io). Terraform is
a tool for safely and efficiently building, combining, and launching
infrastructure.

Terraform is currently HashiCorp's fastest growing project, and we decided
to focus on a strong 0.5 release following
[last month's major release](/blog/terraform-0-4.html).
Terraform 0.5 adds some huge features, improves the core significantly,
and adds significantly more support for AWS resources.

Feature highlights for Terraform 0.5:

  * [Multi-Provider (a.k.a. multi-region)](/blog/terraform-0-5.html#multi-provider)
  * [Automatic AWS retries, dozens of new and improved AWS resources](/blog/terraform-0-5.html#aws)
  * [Basic Templating](/blog/terraform-0-5.html#templating)
  * [WinRM-based provisioning](/blog/terraform-0-5.html#winrm)
  * [Environment variables to set Terraform variables](/blog/terraform-0-5.html#env-vars)

READMORE

## Community

Before diving into features, we want to show a token of gratitude to
the Terraform community. The Terraform community has grown incredibly
fast, and Terraform 0.5 is only as big of a release as it is thanks to
community contributions.

Terraform 0.5 contains commits from 76 contributors. This is almost half
the total contributors of Terraform for all time! This growth was possible
not only due to simply a greater number of people, but also the quality of
contributions has been fantastic.

In addition to this, Terraform now has two new core committers:
[Radek Simko](https://github.com/radeksimko) and
[Dave Cunningham](https://github.com/sparkprime). Both of these individuals
have made numerous exceptional quality contributions to Terraform and
they're now officially core members of the project. Terraform would be much
worse off without them.

<a id="multi-provider">

## Multi-Provider

A major limitation of Terraform prior to 0.5 was the inability for a single
Terraform configuration to manage multiple configurations of a single provider.
The most prevalent use case was to configure AWS multiple times for different
regions, and to manage all those regions within a single Terraform
configuration.

Terraform 0.5 adds support for this feature, and it is easy to use:

<pre class="prettyprint">
# The default provider
provider "aws" {
    # ...
}

# West coast region
provider "aws" {
    alias = "west"

    region = "us-west-2"
}

# Instance using the west coast region
resource "aws_instance" "foo" {
    provider = "aws.west"

    # ...
}
</pre>

You can now configure a provider multiple times, assign an "alias" to
each one, and reference this with the "provider" meta-field on all resources.
If any of these are omitted, it will be named "default".

This feature was done by community member [Matt Good](https://github.com/mgood).

[Multi-Provider is fully documented here.](https://terraform.io/docs/configuration/providers.html)

<a id="aws">

## AWS Improvements

Two months ago, HashiCorp hired [Clint Shryock](https://github.com/catsby)
to work on AWS improvements full time. For Terraform 0.4, Clint migrated
us to the official AWS SDK. For Terraform 0.5, this migration paid off in
spades.

Terraform 0.5 had hundreds of contributions, many of them improving the
AWS provider. In addition to the contributors, the upstream official AWS
SDK was improved to handle automatic API retries for AWS with an exponential
backoff. The result of all this improvement is incredible AWS support in
Terraform 0.5.

Terraform 0.5 adds support for over 20 new AWS resources and dozens more
additional features on top of existing resources. For the full list of
new resources, see [the CHANGELOG](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform/blob/v0.5.0/CHANGELOG.md#050-may-7-2015).

The automatic retry features in Terraform 0.5 fix all the rate limiting
issues larger users were seeing in Terraform 0.4 and earlier. When a rate
limit error is received, Terraform will automatically wait some period of
time and then retry. The number of retries is configurable.

Going forward, we're now working on an automated system to tell us which
API calls we aren't supporting yet in Terraform as a way to guide us to
what remains in AWS. AWS is a massive set of services, and we've been
prioritizing the most popular services. This automated system will help us
see what remains. The goal is complete coverage.

<a id="feature-target">

## AWS Improvements and Features

For the duration of Terraform 0.4 development, one core committer has worked
full time on improving AWS support. This effort has been very successful,
with a number of impactful changes:

  * Tagging support for AWS resources in Terraform.

  * Focus on bug fixes and features to make sure the load balancer, autoscale
    group, launch configuration workflow works really well.

  * Non-destructive updates to RDS.

  * Fix numerous "dependency violation" issues that were source of
    update inconsistencies in Terraform as a result of the eventually
    consistent nature of AWS.

  * Complete migration to the official AWS SDK, giving Terraform full access
    to every AWS API. This will let us complete AWS support over future
    releases.

For 0.4, we focused on major features (such as tagging) and bug fixes
across existing supported resources. For upcoming versions, we're going to
focus on completing support for AWS by adding resources.

<a id="templating">

## Templating

Terraform 0.5 has support for rendering templates as inputs to other
resources. The major use case for this is using the results of other
resources to populate scripts to provision other resources.

Templating is exposed as a new resource in Terraform. This is a strategy
that may not be an obvious use case at first, since resources are generally
assumed to be physical things that are managed (such as servers). However,
they can just as easily be logical things such as rendered templates. An
example will explain:

<pre class="prettyprint">
# Template for initial configuration bash script
resource "template_file" "init" {
    filename = "init.tpl"

    vars {
        consul_address = "${aws_instance.consul.private_ip}"
    }
}

# Create a web server
resource "aws_instance" "web" {
    # ...

    user_data = "${template_file.init.rendered}"
}
</pre>

The `template_file` resource is used to render files with arbitrary
variables that can be populated from other resources using standard
interpolation. The result of the rendering is then available to other
downstream resources.

[Templating is fully documented here.](https://terraform.io/docs/providers/template/index.html)

<a id="winrm">

## WinRM

Terraform 0.5 has support for the `remote-exec` and `file` provisioner via
WinRM. This lets Terraform better manage Windows machines. Usage
is simple and fits seamlessly into the existing model:

<pre class="prettyprint">
provisioner "file" {
    source = "conf/myapp.conf"
    destination = "C:/App/myapp.conf"

    connection {
        type = "winrm"
        user = "Administrator"
        password = "${var.admin_password}"
    }
}
</pre>

You now use the new parameter `type` on the connection block to
specify the type of connection to use. This defaults to SSH so all
previous configurations continue to be valid.

[WinRM is fully documented here.](https://terraform.io/docs/provisioners/connection.html)

<a id="env-vars">

## Setting Variables via the Environment

Terraform has supported
[parameterization with variables](https://terraform.io/docs/configuration/variables.html)
since version 0.1. With Terraform 0.5, these variables can be set using
environment variables in addition to files and command-line flags.

This significantly improves scripting Terraform as well as keeping some
secrets out of files and in the environment instead.

<pre class="prettyprint">
$ TF_VAR_image=foo terraform apply
...
</pre>

[Environment variables to set variables is fully documented here.](https://terraform.io/docs/configuration/variables.html)

## Conclusion

Terraform is our currently our fastest growing project. We're seeing adoption
at many large companies as well as a huge growth in our community. Terraform
0.5 builds on the stability of 0.4, improves that stability, and greatly
enhances the capabilities of Terraform.

Most importantly, Terraform 0.5 adds hundreds of provider improvements,
making Terraform more broadly usable by more people who have been waiting for
specific resources to be supported.

Go [download it](http://www.terraform.io/downloads.html) and give it a try!
