source/blog/2015-12-07-consul-0-6.html.markdown, before:

---
page_title: "Consul 0.6"
title: "Consul 0.6"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/logo-gradient.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/header.png"
tags: consul
author: James Phillips
---

We are excited to release [Consul 0.6](http://www.consul.io), a major update
with many new features and improvements. Consul is a modern datacenter runtime
that provides service discovery, configuration, and orchestration capabilities
in an easy-to-deploy Go binary. It is distributed, highly available, and proven
to scale to tens of thousands of nodes with services across multiple datacenters.

This release has taken a few months to prepare as it involved core changes
like migrating to a totally new in-memory database and adding a new network
tomography subsystem that spans several internal layers. Despite all the major
changes, we've worked hard to make upgrading from Consul 0.5.2 a standard
upgrade that will usually just require an agent restart with the new binary.

There are a huge number of features, bug fixes, and improvements in Consul 0.6.
Consul is also now 100% pure Go, making it even easier to build and deploy. Here
are some of the feature highlights:

 * [Network Tomography](/blog/consul-0-6.html#network-tomography)
 * [New In-Memory Database](/blog/consul-0-6.html#go-memdb)
 * [Prepared Queries](/blog/consul-0-6.html#prepared-queries)
 * [Enhanced ACLs](/blog/consul-0-6.html#enhanced-acls)
 * [TCP and Docker Container Health Checks](/blog/consul-0-6.html#health-checks)
 * [Better Low-Level Network Robustness](/blog/consul-0-6.html#network-robustness)

You can [download Consul 0.6 here](http://www.consul.io/downloads.html) or
view the [changelog](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/blob/v0.6.0/CHANGELOG.md)

Read on to learn more about the major new features in 0.6.

READMORE

<a id="network-tomography"></a>

## Network Tomography

Consul's underlying [gossip protocol](https://www.consul.io/docs/internals/gossip.html),
provided by [Serf](https://serfdom.io/), has all nodes in a cluster perform random probes of other nodes
at regular intervals to detect node failures. A nice side effect of these probes
is that nodes get a measurement of the network round trip time to a different
node each probe period. Consul 0.6 takes advantage of these measurements by
feeding them into a [network tomography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_tomography)
subsystem, based primarily on an algorithm from academic research called [Vivaldi](http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~ravenben/classes/276/papers/vivaldi-sigcomm04.pdf).

The Vivaldi algorithm works in a manner that's similar to a physics simulation of
a system of nodes connected by springs. Nodes start out bunched up at the origin,
but as they learn information about the distances to their peers over time, they
adjust their positions in order to minimize the energy stored in the springs.
The end result of this simulation is a set of "[network coordinates](https://consul.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html)"
that allow the RTT to be estimated between any two nodes in the cluster by
performing a simple calculation.

Here's an animation created using the Vivaldi algorithm, converging for a
simulated cluster with nodes artificially placed into a grid pattern of RTTs:

![Network Coordinate Animation](/images/blog/consul-0-6/grid-animation.gif)

Consul 0.6 adds new commands and API endpoints related to network coordinates, and
weaves them into existing endpoints in powerful ways. Here are some examples
using the new `consul rtt` command which allows operators to interactively query
RTT estimates:

    # Get the estimated RTT from current node to another
    $ consul rtt nyc3-server-1
    Estimated nyc3-server-1 <-> nyc3-server-2 rtt: 1.091 ms (using LAN coordinates)

    # Get the estimated RTT between two other nodes from a third node
    $ consul rtt nyc3-server-1 nyc3-server-3
    Estimated nyc3-server-1 <-> nyc3-server-3 rtt: 1.210 ms (using LAN coordinates)

    # Get the estimated RTT from current server to one in another datacenter
    $ consul rtt -wan sfo1-server-1.sfo1
    Estimated sfo1-server-1.sfo1 <-> nyc3-server-2.nyc3 rtt: 79.291 ms (using WAN coordinates)

Note in the last command above that network coordinates are also available for
the servers in the WAN pool. This is useful for applications such as failing
over to the next closest datacenter if no services are available in the local
datacenter.

Consul 0.6 adds a `?near=` query parameter to many existing APIs to make them
take advantage of network tomography. Here are some examples:

    # Get a list of healthy nodes providing the "redis" service sorted
    # relative to a specific node by RTT
    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/health/service/redis?passing&near=nyc3-server-2

    # Get the full list of nodes sorted relative to a specific node by RTT
    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/catalog/nodes?near=nyc3-server-2

Finally, Consul 0.6 exposes a new HTTP API for raw network coordinates for use
in any external application, allowing for powerful new placement, failover, and
other types of RTT-aware algorithms. Here's an example showing what a network
coordinate looks like:

    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/coordinate/nodes?pretty
    [
      {
        "Node": "nyc3-server-1",
        "Coord": {
            "Vec": [
                0.01566849390443588,
                -0.041767933427767884,
                -0.039999165076651244,
                -0.03846615252705054,
                -0.028208175963693814,
                0.021521109674738765,
                -0.03259531251031965,
                0.0392771535734132
            ],
            "Error": 0.2093820069437395,
            "Adjustment": 0.00038434248982906666,
            "Height": 1.8735554114160737e-05
      }
    },
    ...

Even though it looks like there are a lot components in a network coordinate,
calculating an RTT estimate is very simple. You can find out how these
calculations are performed, and more details about the techniques Consul uses
to improve the accuracy of its RTT estimates by reading the [Consul](https://consul.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html)
and [Serf](https://serfdom.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html) internals guides
on network coordinates.

<a id="go-memdb"></a>

## New In-Memory Database

Previous versions of Consul used [LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/) for the in-memory
database that backs all of a Consul server's data such as the catalog, key/value
store, and sessions. LMDB performed well and was very stable, but by moving to a
new [in-memory database](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-memdb) based on
[radix trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix_tree), we were able to tailor
this core component exactly to Consul's needs, bringing several important
benefits in Consul 0.6.

The design of the database allows data to be directly referenced in the radix
tree, eliminating the need to deserialize structures during read queries. This
dramatically improves the read throughput of Consul's servers, and lowers
garbage collection pressure. Direct references, combined with the use of Go 1.5.1
with its improved garbage collection performance, helps make Consul servers more
stable under heavy read loads that are common in large, busy clusters.

Another benefit is that LMDB was the last `cgo` dependency for Consul, so
removing it makes Consul 100% pure Go code which simplifies the build process
and makes it easier to build Consul for new platforms.

Finally, this new database provides a good foundation for improving the
granularity of blocking queries in a future version of Consul. This can be
added with support from the database itself, and will also exploit the radix
tree structure.

The in-memory store is built from state snapshots and the Raft log at startup,
so upgrading to the new in-memory database doesn't require any special steps.
However, because we removed the LMDB dependency, there's no longer an automated
migration for the Raft log itself when upgrading from Consul versions prior to
0.5.1. Please see the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html)
for details.

<a id="prepared-queries"></a>

## Prepared Queries

Consul's DNS interface is a popular part of Consul because it's simple to use and
integrates with nearly any existing application. A common request is to expose
more features via DNS, such as queries using multiple tags. Also, we wanted to expose
the new network tomography system via DNS. Unfortunately, the syntax of DNS queries is
fairly limited so it's hard to add complex new functionality.

Consul 0.6 introduces prepared queries which allow a complex query to be defined
via a new HTTP API endpoint and then exposed via DNS. Here's an example query
definition that shows some of the features possible with prepared queries:

    $ curl -X POST -d \
    '{
      "Name": "redis-with-failover",
      "Service": {
        "Service": "redis",
        "Failover": {
          "NearestN": 3
        },
        "Tags": ["master", "!experimental"]
      },
      "DNS": {
        "TTL": "10s"
      }
    }' localhost:8500/v1/query

    {"ID":"5e1e24e5-1329-f86f-18c6-3d3734edb2cd"}

Once this prepared query is registered with Consul, a DNS lookup for
`redis-with-failover.query.consul` will execute the following steps:

 1. Look for healthy instances of the "redis" service in the local datacenter
 2. Filter those to instances that have the required tag "master" but not the
    disallowed tag "experimental"
 3. If no instances are available in the local datacenter, then query up 3 of
    the nearest remote datacenters, based on RTT data from network tomography
 4. Return results with a DNS TTL of 10 seconds

As shown in the example above, this simple `redis-with-failover.query.consul`
prepared query exposes a great deal of functionality in a way that would be
impractical to encode into a DNS query. Other properties of prepared queries
include service discovery ACL support, session integration, and a user-defined
list of datacenters for failovers. Existing prepared queries can also be updated
on the fly to change their behavior without having to change any Consul agent
configurations.

Prepared queries were designed for future extensibility so that DNS can continue
to support new features offered by Consul as it evolves. Query results are also
available via a new HTTP endpoint for integration with other applications.

More details are available in the [prepared query HTTP endpoint documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/agent/http/query.html)

<a id="enhanced-acls"></a>

## Enhanced ACLs

Consul users often have several different teams sharing the same infrastructure
so a common request has been richer ACLs to support mixed environments. Consul
0.6 provides several enhanced ACLs to support these uses.

Service ACLs have been extended to cover service discovery, not just service
registration. With read ACLs enabled, HTTP clients would need to provide a
capable token in order to read service information. By registering prepared
queries with a capable token and providing the secure prepared query ID to
clients, service discovery read ACLs can be enabled even when using the DNS
interface.

New ACLs have also been added to control access to firing user events and for
keyring operations.

Because these new ACLs can affect the access available to the `anonymous` token,
it's important to plan a new policy when upgrading to Consul 0.6 to maintain the
same behavior as before if the `acl_default_policy` is set to deny. An ACL policy
like this for Consul 0.6 would mimic the behavior of previous Consul versions:

    service "" {
      policy = "read"
    }

    event "" {
      policy = "write"
    }

    keyring = "write"

More details are available in the [ACL documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/internals/acl.html) and
the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html).

<a id="health-checks"></a>

## TCP and Docker Container Health Checks

Consul 0.6 introduces two new types of health checks. A TCP check performs a
simple connect at a periodic interval. Here's an example definition:

    {
      "check": {
        "id": "ssh",
        "name": "SSH TCP on port 22",
        "tcp": "localhost:22",
        "interval": "10s",
        "timeout": "1s"
      }
    }

A Docker check runs a script inside a container at a periodic interval. An
optional shell can be specified, or else `/bin/sh` will be used by default.
Here's an example configuration:

    {
      "check": {
        "id": "mem-util",
        "name": "Memory utilization",
        "docker_container_id": "f972c95ebf0e",
        "shell": "/bin/bash",
        "script": "/usr/local/bin/check_mem.py",
        "interval": "10s"
      }
    }

More details can be found in the [health check documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/agent/checks.html).

<a id="network-robustness"></a>

## Better Low-Level Network Robustness

Consul 0.6 introduces many low-level changes to help make Consul more stable in
the face of misconfigured or misbehaving networks.

A TCP fallback probe was added to Serf's node failure detector in order to help
operators diagnose a common misconfiguration where TCP traffic is allowed
between nodes but not UDP. A log message will alert the operator to the problem,
but the node will still be probed successfully, preventing a flappy failure
detection. This also helps ride out brief periods of high packet loss by
providing a more reliable alternate path to probe another node.

Consul's stream multiplexer and connection pool logic was also improved to
provide much lower overhead when network reconnects occur, as well as reducing
memory usage when connections are idle. The internal RPC mechanism was also
updated to reduce overhead for the Consul servers. These changes all help make
Consul more stable under heavy loads, even during periods with some network
instability.

## Upgrade Details

Consul 0.6 has been designed to "upshift" automatically as servers and clients
are upgraded to start taking advantage of network tomography features and new
protocol features such as the TCP fallback probe. For most configurations,
upgrading will just require an agent restart with the new binary.

Prepared queries introduce new internal commands and must not be used until
all servers have been upgraded to version 0.6.0.

A manual step may be required to migrate Raft log data if you are upgrading from
a Consul version prior to 0.5.1. Please see the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html)
for details.

As described above, any users with the `acl_default_policy` set to `deny` must
update their policies to handle the service enforcement prior to upgrade.
Otherwise, service discovery will be denied by ACLs. This also applies to the
new event and keyring ACL types, but those can only be updated after the upgrade
is complete, so some planning may be required in order to prevent disruptions if
these features are being used.

More details are available on the [upgrade process here](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html).

## Roadmap

The next release will be focused less on major new features and more on bug
fixes, small improvements, and performance. We hope to have smaller, more
frequent releases now that these major changes are completed!

If you experience any issues, please report them on [GitHub](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/issues).

Commit message:

Adds some more upgrade notes for Consul 0.6.

source/blog/2015-12-07-consul-0-6.html.markdown, after:

---
page_title: "Consul 0.6"
title: "Consul 0.6"
list_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/logo-gradient.png"
post_image_url: "/images/blog/consul/header.png"
tags: consul
author: James Phillips
---

We are excited to release [Consul 0.6](http://www.consul.io), a major update
with many new features and improvements. Consul is a modern datacenter runtime
that provides service discovery, configuration, and orchestration capabilities
in an easy-to-deploy Go binary. It is distributed, highly available, and proven
to scale to tens of thousands of nodes with services across multiple datacenters.

This release has taken a few months to prepare as it involved core changes
like migrating to a totally new in-memory database and adding a new network
tomography subsystem that spans several internal layers. Despite all the major
changes, we've worked hard to make upgrading from Consul 0.5.2 a standard
upgrade that will usually just require an agent restart with the new binary.

There are a huge number of features, bug fixes, and improvements in Consul 0.6.
Consul is also now 100% pure Go, making it even easier to build and deploy. Here
are some of the feature highlights:

 * [Network Tomography](/blog/consul-0-6.html#network-tomography)
 * [New In-Memory Database](/blog/consul-0-6.html#go-memdb)
 * [Prepared Queries](/blog/consul-0-6.html#prepared-queries)
 * [Enhanced ACLs](/blog/consul-0-6.html#enhanced-acls)
 * [TCP and Docker Container Health Checks](/blog/consul-0-6.html#health-checks)
 * [Better Low-Level Network Robustness](/blog/consul-0-6.html#network-robustness)

You can [download Consul 0.6 here](http://www.consul.io/downloads.html) or
view the [changelog](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/blob/v0.6.0/CHANGELOG.md)

Read on to learn more about the major new features in 0.6.

READMORE

<a id="network-tomography"></a>

## Network Tomography

Consul's underlying [gossip protocol](https://www.consul.io/docs/internals/gossip.html),
provided by [Serf](https://serfdom.io/), has all nodes in a cluster perform random probes of other nodes
at regular intervals to detect node failures. A nice side effect of these probes
is that nodes get a measurement of the network round trip time to a different
node each probe period. Consul 0.6 takes advantage of these measurements by
feeding them into a [network tomography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_tomography)
subsystem, based primarily on an algorithm from academic research called [Vivaldi](http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~ravenben/classes/276/papers/vivaldi-sigcomm04.pdf).

The Vivaldi algorithm works in a manner that's similar to a physics simulation of
a system of nodes connected by springs. Nodes start out bunched up at the origin,
but as they learn information about the distances to their peers over time, they
adjust their positions in order to minimize the energy stored in the springs.
The end result of this simulation is a set of "[network coordinates](https://consul.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html)"
that allow the RTT to be estimated between any two nodes in the cluster by
performing a simple calculation.

Here's an animation created using the Vivaldi algorithm, converging for a
simulated cluster with nodes artificially placed into a grid pattern of RTTs:

![Network Coordinate Animation](/images/blog/consul-0-6/grid-animation.gif)

Consul 0.6 adds new commands and API endpoints related to network coordinates, and
weaves them into existing endpoints in powerful ways. Here are some examples
using the new `consul rtt` command which allows operators to interactively query
RTT estimates:

    # Get the estimated RTT from current node to another
    $ consul rtt nyc3-server-1
    Estimated nyc3-server-1 <-> nyc3-server-2 rtt: 1.091 ms (using LAN coordinates)

    # Get the estimated RTT between two other nodes from a third node
    $ consul rtt nyc3-server-1 nyc3-server-3
    Estimated nyc3-server-1 <-> nyc3-server-3 rtt: 1.210 ms (using LAN coordinates)

    # Get the estimated RTT from current server to one in another datacenter
    $ consul rtt -wan sfo1-server-1.sfo1
    Estimated sfo1-server-1.sfo1 <-> nyc3-server-2.nyc3 rtt: 79.291 ms (using WAN coordinates)

Note in the last command above that network coordinates are also available for
the servers in the WAN pool. This is useful for applications such as failing
over to the next closest datacenter if no services are available in the local
datacenter.

Consul 0.6 adds a `?near=` query parameter to many existing APIs to make them
take advantage of network tomography. Here are some examples:

    # Get a list of healthy nodes providing the "redis" service sorted
    # relative to a specific node by RTT
    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/health/service/redis?passing&near=nyc3-server-2

    # Get the full list of nodes sorted relative to a specific node by RTT
    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/catalog/nodes?near=nyc3-server-2

Finally, Consul 0.6 exposes a new HTTP API for raw network coordinates for use
in any external application, allowing for powerful new placement, failover, and
other types of RTT-aware algorithms. Here's an example showing what a network
coordinate looks like:

    $ curl localhost:8500/v1/coordinate/nodes?pretty
    [
      {
        "Node": "nyc3-server-1",
        "Coord": {
            "Vec": [
                0.01566849390443588,
                -0.041767933427767884,
                -0.039999165076651244,
                -0.03846615252705054,
                -0.028208175963693814,
                0.021521109674738765,
                -0.03259531251031965,
                0.0392771535734132
            ],
            "Error": 0.2093820069437395,
            "Adjustment": 0.00038434248982906666,
            "Height": 1.8735554114160737e-05
      }
    },
    ...

Even though it looks like there are a lot components in a network coordinate,
calculating an RTT estimate is very simple. You can find out how these
calculations are performed, and more details about the techniques Consul uses
to improve the accuracy of its RTT estimates by reading the [Consul](https://consul.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html)
and [Serf](https://serfdom.io/docs/internals/coordinates.html) internals guides
on network coordinates.

<a id="go-memdb"></a>

## New In-Memory Database

Previous versions of Consul used [LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/) for the in-memory
database that backs all of a Consul server's data such as the catalog, key/value
store, and sessions. LMDB performed well and was very stable, but by moving to a
new [in-memory database](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-memdb) based on
[radix trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix_tree), we were able to tailor
this core component exactly to Consul's needs, bringing several important
benefits in Consul 0.6.

The design of the database allows data to be directly referenced in the radix
tree, eliminating the need to deserialize structures during read queries. This
dramatically improves the read throughput of Consul's servers, and lowers
garbage collection pressure. Direct references, combined with the use of Go 1.5.1
with its improved garbage collection performance, helps make Consul servers more
stable under heavy read loads that are common in large, busy clusters.

Another benefit is that LMDB was the last `cgo` dependency for Consul, so
removing it makes Consul 100% pure Go code which simplifies the build process
and makes it easier to build Consul for new platforms.

Finally, this new database provides a good foundation for improving the
granularity of blocking queries in a future version of Consul. This can be
added with support from the database itself, and will also exploit the radix
tree structure.

The in-memory store is built from state snapshots and the Raft log at startup,
so upgrading to the new in-memory database doesn't require any special steps.
However, because we removed the LMDB dependency, there's no longer an automated
migration for the Raft log itself when upgrading from Consul versions prior to
0.5.1. Please see the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html)
for details.

<a id="prepared-queries"></a>

## Prepared Queries

Consul's DNS interface is a popular part of Consul because it's simple to use and
integrates with nearly any existing application. A common request is to expose
more features via DNS, such as queries using multiple tags. Also, we wanted to expose
the new network tomography system via DNS. Unfortunately, the syntax of DNS queries is
fairly limited so it's hard to add complex new functionality.

Consul 0.6 introduces prepared queries which allow a complex query to be defined
via a new HTTP API endpoint and then exposed via DNS. Here's an example query
definition that shows some of the features possible with prepared queries:

    $ curl -X POST -d \
    '{
      "Name": "redis-with-failover",
      "Service": {
        "Service": "redis",
        "Failover": {
          "NearestN": 3
        },
        "Tags": ["master", "!experimental"]
      },
      "DNS": {
        "TTL": "10s"
      }
    }' localhost:8500/v1/query

    {"ID":"5e1e24e5-1329-f86f-18c6-3d3734edb2cd"}

Once this prepared query is registered with Consul, a DNS lookup for
`redis-with-failover.query.consul` will execute the following steps:

 1. Look for healthy instances of the "redis" service in the local datacenter
 2. Filter those to instances that have the required tag "master" but not the
    disallowed tag "experimental"
 3. If no instances are available in the local datacenter, then query up 3 of
    the nearest remote datacenters, based on RTT data from network tomography
 4. Return results with a DNS TTL of 10 seconds

As shown in the example above, this simple `redis-with-failover.query.consul`
prepared query exposes a great deal of functionality in a way that would be
impractical to encode into a DNS query. Other properties of prepared queries
include service discovery ACL support, session integration, and a user-defined
list of datacenters for failovers. Existing prepared queries can also be updated
on the fly to change their behavior without having to change any Consul agent
configurations.

Prepared queries were designed for future extensibility so that DNS can continue
to support new features offered by Consul as it evolves. Query results are also
available via a new HTTP endpoint for integration with other applications.

More details are available in the [prepared query HTTP endpoint documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/agent/http/query.html)

<a id="enhanced-acls"></a>

## Enhanced ACLs

Consul users often have several different teams sharing the same infrastructure
so a common request has been richer ACLs to support mixed environments. Consul
0.6 provides several enhanced ACLs to support these uses.

Service ACLs have been extended to cover service discovery, not just service
registration. With read ACLs enabled, HTTP clients would need to provide a
capable token in order to read service information. By registering prepared
queries with a capable token and providing the secure prepared query ID to
clients, service discovery read ACLs can be enabled even when using the DNS
interface.

New ACLs have also been added to control access to firing user events and for
keyring operations.

Because these new ACLs can affect the access available to the `anonymous` token,
it's important to plan a new policy when upgrading to Consul 0.6 to maintain the
same behavior as before if the `acl_default_policy` is set to deny. An ACL policy
like this for Consul 0.6 would mimic the behavior of previous Consul versions:

    service "" {
      policy = "read"
    }

    event "" {
      policy = "write"
    }

    keyring = "write"

More details are available in the [ACL documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/internals/acl.html) and
the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html).

<a id="health-checks"></a>

## TCP and Docker Container Health Checks

Consul 0.6 introduces two new types of health checks. A TCP check performs a
simple connect at a periodic interval. Here's an example definition:

    {
      "check": {
        "id": "ssh",
        "name": "SSH TCP on port 22",
        "tcp": "localhost:22",
        "interval": "10s",
        "timeout": "1s"
      }
    }

A Docker check runs a script inside a container at a periodic interval. An
optional shell can be specified, or else `/bin/sh` will be used by default.
Here's an example configuration:

    {
      "check": {
        "id": "mem-util",
        "name": "Memory utilization",
        "docker_container_id": "f972c95ebf0e",
        "shell": "/bin/bash",
        "script": "/usr/local/bin/check_mem.py",
        "interval": "10s"
      }
    }

More details can be found in the [health check documentation](https://www.consul.io/docs/agent/checks.html).

<a id="network-robustness"></a>

## Better Low-Level Network Robustness

Consul 0.6 introduces many low-level changes to help make Consul more stable in
the face of misconfigured or misbehaving networks.

A TCP fallback probe was added to Serf's node failure detector in order to help
operators diagnose a common misconfiguration where TCP traffic is allowed
between nodes but not UDP. A log message will alert the operator to the problem,
but the node will still be probed successfully, preventing a flappy failure
detection. This also helps ride out brief periods of high packet loss by
providing a more reliable alternate path to probe another node.

Consul's stream multiplexer and connection pool logic was also improved to
provide much lower overhead when network reconnects occur, as well as reducing
memory usage when connections are idle. The internal RPC mechanism was also
updated to reduce overhead for the Consul servers. These changes all help make
Consul more stable under heavy loads, even during periods with some network
instability.

## Upgrade Details

Consul 0.6 has been designed to "upshift" automatically as servers and clients
are upgraded to start taking advantage of network tomography features and new
protocol features such as the TCP fallback probe. For most configurations,
upgrading will just require an agent restart with the new binary.

Prepared queries introduce new internal commands and must not be used until
all servers have been upgraded to version 0.6.0.

A manual step may be required to migrate Raft log data if you are upgrading from
a Consul version prior to 0.5.1. Please see the [upgrade process documentation](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html)
for details.

Consul will refuse to start if there are multiple private IPs available, so
if this is the case you will need to configure Consul's advertise or bind
addresses before upgrading.

As described above, any users with the `acl_default_policy` set to `deny` must
update their policies to handle the service enforcement prior to upgrade.
Otherwise, service discovery will be denied by ACLs. This also applies to the
new event and keyring ACL types, but those can only be updated after the upgrade
is complete, so some planning may be required in order to prevent disruptions if
these features are being used.

More details are available on the [upgrade process here](https://consul.io/docs/upgrade-specific.html).

## Roadmap

The next release will be focused less on major new features and more on bug
fixes, small improvements, and performance. We hope to have smaller, more
frequent releases now that these major changes are completed!

If you experience any issues, please report them on [GitHub](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/issues).
